---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  Sheet 3
date:   2019-04-29 09:33:19 +0100
categories: exercises 
---

## Sheet 4


### Task 1

The following is based on a tutorial on Lagrangian Relaxation by J E
Beasley.

Consider the following set covering problem (SCP):

$$
\vec{c} = \begin{bmatrix} 2,3,4,5 \end{bmatrix}
$$

$$
A=[a_{ij}] = \begin{bmatrix} 1& 0& 1& 0\\
 1& 0& 0& 1 \\
 0 &1 &1 &1 \\
 \end{bmatrix}
$$

Mathematically this example SCP is:

$$
\begin{array}{rrl}
\text{minimize}& 2x_1 + 3x_2 + 4x_3 + 5x_4\\
\text{s.t.}& x_1 + x_3 &\geq 1\\
 &x_1 + x_4&\geq 1\\
 &x_2 + x_3 + x_4& \geq 1\\
& x_j\in\{0,1\}&  j=1,...,4
\end{array}
$$


1. Generate a Lagrangian relaxation of this SCP. Write it in general
   terms for a SCP and for the numerical example given. 

2. Let the problem determined at the previous point be called LLBP
   (Lagrangian lower bound problem). Consider the arbitrarily decided
   set of values for the Lagrangian multipliers
   $\lambda_1=1.5,\lambda_2=1.6,\lambda_3=2.2$.
   Find the solution to the LLBP and the corresponding lower bound $z_{LLBP}$ to the
   original problem.
   Is this a lower bound? Is the solution found for the LLBP feasible
   for the original problem? Is the solution found for the LLBP optimal
   for the original problem? 

  
3. Repeat the task at the point 2. for the set of values: 
   $\lambda_1=10,\lambda_2=10,\lambda_3=10$. Under what
   circumstances does the solutions to the LLBP being feasible for the
   original problem also imply that it is optimal for the original
   problem?

4. Find the optimal solution to the original problem by solving the
   Lagrangian dual problem by subgradient optimization.
   Set the step size to the value:
   
   $$
   \theta=\mu \frac{z_{UB}-z_{LB}}{\sum_{i=1}^m (\gamma_i)^2}
   $$
   
   where $z_{LB}$ and $z_{UB}$ are the current lower bound and upper
   bound, respectively and $\mu$ an user defined parameter (try with 2
   and decrease it throughout the iterations).
   
   Update $\lambda_i$ using 
   
   $$
   \lambda_i=\max\{\lambda_i+\theta\gamma_i,0\}\qquad i=1,..,m
   $$




### Task 2

Consider the following problem (Fisher M., An Applications Oriented
Guide to Lagrangian Relaxation. Interfaces, 15:2, 1985):

$$
\begin{array}{lllll}
z_P=&\text{max} &16x_1+10x_2+4x_4\\
&\text{s.t.}&8x_1+2x_2+x_3+x_4\leq 10\\
&&x_1+x_2\leq 1\\
&&x_3+x_4\leq 1\\
&&0\leq x\leq 1 \qquad \text{and integer}
\end{array}
$$

1. Relax only the first constraint and calculate the Lagrangian dual
   bound.
   
2. Relax the second and third constraints and calculate the Lagrangian
   dual bound. Which among the two relaxations provides the best dual
   bound and how do they compare with respect to the dual bound given by
   the linear relaxation of the original problem P? 
