---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  Sheet 3
date:   2019-04-22 09:33:19 +0100
categories: exercises 
---

## Sheet 3


### Task 1  - Home Preparation


Review the articles [KN1,KN2,ABGRW].

### Task 2  - In Class


Let $C$ be a set of courses that need to have an exam session scheduled.
Let $D$ be the set of integer numbers representing the days of the month
that are available for scheduling exams. In the general case we will
assume that the set $D$ may contain holes. For each course $c \in
C$ we are given the duration $d_c$ of the exam expressed in number of
days. Finally, we are given the enrollments of students to the courses,
ie, a set $C_s\subset C$ for each student $s$. An *exam schedule* is an
assignment of courses to days for the exam, that is, it is a function
$\sigma : C \to 2^D$.

An exam schedule is feasible if it satisfies the following constraints:

-   Each course is assigned a number of days equal to the duration of
    its exam, that is, $|\sigma(c)|= d_c$ for all $c$ in $C$.

-   Courses with exam duration longer than one day receive
    consecutive days. Holes due to weekends must also be avoided.

-   Courses that share students must have exams with at least $R$ days
    of distance.

-   Courses that for some reason are *paired* must have exams schedules
    in the same days.

You are given a starting package containing data for the exam scheduling
on E15 and E16 at the Faculty of Science, SDU:
<https://imada.sdu.dk/~marco/DM872/assets/data_exams.tgz>.


It is desirable that the distance between exams for each student is
maximized.

Your tasks:

-   write a MILP model to find feasible exam schedules.

-   write a MILP model to find exam schedules that are optimal with
    respect to the stated criterion.

\[Hint: In the following a procedure to achieve the goal of maximizing
the distance is described. This is not the only way.

To each schedule a *total penalty* is associated. It is calculated as
follows. For a course $c$ whose exam is scheduled to start on timeslot
$t$ let $C_c$ be the set of exams sharing students with exam $c$. For
$c$ and its date $t$ let the penalty with respect to an exam $b$ from
$C_c$ be defined as a function of the distance between the date $t$ and
the starting day of the exam $b$. Specifically, this penalty is:

```
    if distance > 6:
        penalty = 0
    else if distance > 4:
        penalty = 2
    else if distance > 2:
        penalty = 4
    else if distance > 1:
        penalty = 10
    else (distance = 1 or 0)
        penalty = 50
```


The penalty for $c$ scheduled on $t$ is then given by the sum of the
penalties given with the exams in $C_c$ multiplied by the number of
shared students. Finally, the total penalty of the overall schedule is
given by the sum of the penalties of the exams of each course. The goal
is to minimize the total penalty.\]


