---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  Sheet 7
date:   2019-05-21 09:33:19 +0100
categories: exercises 
---

## Sheet 7

The goal of this activity is to make hands on experience with column
generation for solving the regional crew scheduling problem. The problem
is formulated by model (7)-(9) in the slides of the lecture.


Download the file [cg-template.py]({{ "/assets/cg-template.py" |
absolute_url}}) that contains a skeleton with TODO spots where you are
going to add your python code.

### Task 1 - Unconstrained case (no resources)

We consider first a simplified case where there are no resource
constraints on the drivers’ duties. Download the file [ist-0.dat]({{
"/assets/ist-0.dat" | absolute_url}}). We use
the implemented function `readDataNoResource` to read it.

- Create an initial covering of the pieces of work. Complete the function
`heuristicPaths`. Do not use much of your time on this.

- Solve the LP relaxation of the problem with only the initial set of
variables/columns. For this task we prepared a function called
`solveRestrictedMaster`. 

- A peculiarity of the column generation approach is that constraints
  are introduced empty, since the variables are not all known at the
  beginning and we will need to introduce them together with their
  coefficients in the constraints iteratively. Hence, to introduce the
  initial variables we need to declare them with their coefficient in
  the objective function and in the constraints. In gurobi we achieve
  this by passing the additional argument column to the function
  Model.addVar.
  
- Next we look for columns to add using the function
  columnGeneration. We solve the relaxed restricted master and take the
  values of the dual variables. Your task is now creating the network
  for the pricing problem. In particular you have to define the costs on
  the arcs. Set your arcs in a list $B$ of triples, each triple made by
  $(i,j,c_{ij})$, that is, starting node, ending node and cost.
  
  
- Implement by MIP the pricing problem in `pricingProblem`.

- Write the condition in `columnGeneration` that checks which of the
  `path(s)` found are worth inserting in the master problem. Check here
  also when the column generation procedure has to stop.
  
  

### Task 2 - Resource Constrained case

We now turn to the case where there are resources with constrains to
take care of in the composition of the drivers’ duties. Download the
file [ist-1.dat]({{ "/assets/ist-1.dat" | absolute_url}}) that includes
specifications on the resources and their constraints. We use the
implemented function `readDataWithResource` to read it.

- Implement by MIP the pricing problem for this case.  Compare the
results in terms of computation time of your MIP implementation against
the use of [path-solver]({{ "/assets/path-solver" | absolute_url}}) (you
find executables for Linux, Mac and Windows together with the source
archive in the course web page).
