---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  Assignment 2
date:   2022-05-30 00:33:19 +0100
categories: assignments 
---

**Deadline: Monday, June 20, 2022, at 23:59.**

For questions on the assignment, use the [Discussion Board under
Resources in LMS](https://sdu.itslearning.com/ContentArea/ContentArea.aspx?LocationID=9315&LocationType=1).

## Assignment 2

This is the second assignment. It will be graded and will contribute to your final
assessment in the course.

The assignment has to be carried out individually.


To complete the assignment you have to submit in [LMS] a `.tgz` or `.zip` archive
named `asg2.tgz` or `asg2.zip` that decompress in the following
structure:
```
asg1
|
+--tex
|
+--src
```

- `tex` must contain a report in pdf format as concise as possible (by no way more than 10
  pages) with the answers to the tasks. The report should be written
  preferably in Latex using this [template]({{ "/assets/template_answers.tex" | absolute_url }}).

- `src` must contain the Python code for the calculations.




## Exam Timetabling 

Your task is to use mixed integer linear programming to find optimal
solutions to the slightly simplified) *exam timetabling problem* at the
Faculty of Science at SDU.

<p style="color:green">A starting package with problem instance data and
explanation of it is available in the
[git repository](https://github.com/DM872/Material/).


<!--
<a href="../assets/Exams.tgz">Exams.tgz</a>.</p>
-->

Let $E$ be the set of exams for courses that need to have a date
scheduled. Let $D$ be the set of days and $R$ the set of rooms that are
available for scheduling exams. Each exam $e$ from $E$ has a set of
enrolled students $S_e$ and requires a number of days depending on
whether it is written or oral.

Exams that for some reason cannot have overlapping schedules are
called *conflicting* exams. In particular, exams with the same teacher
or censor and exams that belong to the same study program are considered
conflicting.

An *exam schedule* is an assignment of exams to days and rooms for the
exam, that is, it is a function $\sigma : E \to 2^D \times R$. An exam schedule
is *feasible* if it satisfies the following constraints:

1.  Each exam in input is scheduled to start and finish in the days
    available.

2.  Each exam is assigned a number of days, equal to the
    number of required days to carry out the exam.

3.  Exams with exam duration more than one day receive consecutive days.
    No holes due to weekend or holidays are allowed within an exam
    schedule.

4.  Exams must receive exactly one room (hence the same room if the exam
    is in mulitple days) with a suitable capacity (that is, if the exam
    is written, then the number of seats of the room must exceed the
    number of students enrolled in the course).

4.  Exams with preassigned dates must respect those dates.

5.  Exams cannot be assinged to rooms that are occupied by othe exams or
    unavailable during part of the day.

5.  Exams that are *joined* must have schedules starting on the same
    day. (The durations for both should be the sum of the durations of the
    two exams but you can ignore this).

6.  Exams that are *conflicting* must be scheduled in sets of days with
    empty intersection.

<!--
7.  The total number of students having *written* exams in a day must be
    smaller than `MAX_SEATS_PER_DAY`. Exams with predefined dates do not
    contribute to this constraint.

8.  The total number of *oral* exams in a day must be smaller than
    `MAX_ROOMS_PER_DAY` in order to ensure that a room to host them can
    be found. Exams with predefined dates do not count in this
    constraint.
-->

If a feasible schedule that satisfies all the above constraints is
found, then one should try to maximize the distance between the starting
times of exams that share students. This optimization task can be
achieved in different ways, for example, by introducing a new constraint
that enforces a distance of $R$ days between exams that share students
and then maximizing $R$ and/or minimizing the number of students
violating this constraints, or by devising a penalty scheme that
penalizes exams sharing students that are scheduled too close.

If a feasible schedule cannot be found then one must relax the
constraints on the conflicting courses and treat them as those sharing
students but with higher priority in avoiding overlaps. The parameter
`WEIGHT_PROGRAMS` indicates the relative importance between avoiding
overlaps for conflicting courses and avoiding overlaps for courses that
only share students.


### Your Tasks


For an excellent performance you have to give account of the tasks below
in a written report of a most 10 pages (using the template provided in
Assignment 1):

1.  Formulate the problem as a MILP problem. You achive higher rewward
    if your model addresses issuses of fairness and equity.

2.  Test the model on the instances given. Try first the small instances
    and then the larger ones. Limit the running times to 30 minutes or
    less. This is not so important.
	
3.  For the instances that were not solved to optimality design and
    implemented and advanced method departing from your MILP model that
    improves the computational results on the unsolved instances. 

4.  Report the numerical results summarising the log files collected bringing
    light on what happens.


### Questions & Answers


- Der også typen "o" som er for Bachelorprojekt. Skal dettes ses som
  "oral", "written" eller slet ikke planlægges?
  
  You are right that ‘o’ is mostly for bachelorprojekt but it has to be
  interpreted as requiring one single day rather than, as in the oral
  exams, requiring as many days as the number of participants
  requires. Bachelorprojekter should be scheduled in the first day of
  those available. This is because it is supposed to be the submission
  of the report. All those exams should have a date already given and
  hence should not require to be scheduled.
 

- Are there any specific requirements on how the output should look like
  or is it entire up to the students to format the output they wish?
  
  
  You can either report the solution in a text file as follows:
  ```
  N100007102,27
  N100008102,6
  N100008132,12
  N100015102,4
  N100018102,6
  N100020102,13
  N100029102,17,18,19,20
  ```
  or in a json file as follows:
  ```
  {
    "N100007102": [
        27
    ],
    "N100008102": [
        6
    ],
    "N100008132": [
        12
    ],
    "N100015102": [
        4
    ],
    "N100018102": [
        6
    ],
    "N100020102": [
        13
    ],
    "N100029102": [
        17,
        18,
        19,
        20
    ],
  ```
  which can be easily obtained in python importing the module `json`
  and the following line of code, where `dates` is a
  dictionary with exam STADS code as key and the list of days as values:  
  ```python
  json.dump(dates, fp=filehandle, sort_keys=False, ignore_nan=True,
                  indent=4, separators=(',', ': '),  ensure_ascii=False)
  ```
  

- In `config.json` in E21 the set of available days start from January
  4th, but some of the exams are already scheduled to be at January
  3rd. Does this mean that exams can be scheduled at January 3rd as
  well?

  No, exams can only be scheduled from the 4th. But exams scheduled on
  the 3rd should count in the distances. 

- Does this mean that if exams are pre-planned, they should be planned
  on that date, even though it is a "illegal" day?  And thoses exams
  that are not pre-planned, they need to follow the rules for "legal"
  days?


  Yes. You do not have to plan exams that are already planned and it is
  fine to leave where they are but they can be taken into account when
  calculating how isolated an exam is.


- Should the "forbidden" and "available" information that is given
  at some of the exams be used when scheduling them?

  That would be nice, yes.


- Exams listed in `conflicting` are courses that belong to the same
  study program. Avoiding overlaps among these exams is a hard
  constraint. Avoiding overlaps among exams that share students is a
  soft constraint. 
 
  For E20 it should be possible to avoid overlaps amongs conflicting
  exams on all instances. For E21 it is not known. The assignment states
  \"If a feasible schedule cannot be found then one must relax the
  constraints on the conflicting courses and treat them as those sharing
  students but with higher priority in avoiding overlaps.\" In this case,
  the `WEIGHT_PROGRAMS` indictaes the relative importance of the two
  overlap constraints.
  

- Note that you if you find infeasible instances it might be good having
  a look at what are the reasons for infeasibility. In Gurobi you can
  try: `Model.computeIIS()` which compute an Irreducible Inconsistent Subsystem (IIS).  
  Known possible infeasibility issues in E20: `conflicting` includes the
  exam itself; the exams B560001102 and B560003102 share a single
  student (5a51dabaaa908176c2b9be887a688afd) but are also both
  preassigned to start at day 4. You are welcome to resolve issues of
  this type by changing the instance data, (eg, removing that student or
  one of the exams). However, in doing this operation seek to apply the
  minimal impact on the instance.



<!--
As a note to everybody, you could experiment for your own interest what
happens when you leave the self conflicting exams in the data. In this
case with the approach above you should find that no feasible solution
is possible. When this happens in practice it might be interesting
investigating what is the cause of infeasibility. In MiniZinc it is
possible to find the Miminum Unsatisfiable Subset of constraints that
makes a problem unsatisfiable. see Chap 3.7 from the MiniZinc manual.
You could try to apply that procedure and see what happens.

The separation between conflicting exams and exams sharing students was
done on purpose to make the problem computationally easier. In practice,
it is very important that also exams sharing students do not overlap. I
expect this to make the problem much harder from a computational point
of view and in some cases also infeasible. I find important that when
presenting the solutions you look at whether exams that share students
overlap or what is their worst case distance.

Finally, projects like these can engage you for a large amount of hours
if you are not careful and self impose a time limit. Hence, be
considerate and do not overwork on this project leaving other exams
aside. This was not the purpose of the long deadline although I see that
it can be a dangerous consequence of it.

Question: Cool! FindMUS seems like a very useful feature! I tried to add
the no shared students as a hard constraint, which only fails for the
entire dataset. Using the FindMUS solver, I found the issue is between
the exams B560001102 and B560003102 which share a single student
(5a51dabaaa908176c2b9be887a688afd) but are also both preassigned to
start at day 4.

How should we handle this? Should we do something to the data (e.g.
remove the student from one of the exams, changing a preassigned day or
something) or should we just keep the shared student avoidance as a soft
constraint (and maybe a hard for all the other datasets where it imposes
no problems)

Answer: It is in part an open project. Hence, any sensible (motivated)
decision is fine for me.

Both your proposals have good motivations.

I would perhaps keep the shared student avoidance as a soft constraint,
making sure that I minimize the number of students with overlaps and not
exams, as otherwise we risk preferring a solution with ten students with
overlaps against one that has only one student with overlaps. This
solution has the advantage that one does not have to change the code
depending on the instance.
-->
